[THEME MUSIC]
>>KEN HANSON: There's
always something new
to talk about when
it comes to the world
of biblical scholarship.
>>GEORGE NOORY: These constant
discoveries are amazing.
>>HANSON: They were
put in these caves
at different periods of time.
They're literally
rappelling down the side
of cliffs, 250 feet down--
this is dangerous-- in
order to get into some
of these ancient caves.
The most important biblical
document ever discovered.
We're thinking about 800 to
900 BCE, Before the Common Era.
>>NOORY: Wow.
>>HANSON: If this is not
authentic, I will eat it.
You could not make this up.
It's beyond belief.
>>NOORY: There is nothing
more fascinating to me
than ancient history,
and Dr. Ken Hanson
is back with us, a scholar of
Hebrew language and literature
and the history of the Jewish
people, from ancient times
through the
Holocaust and beyond.
Ken, welcome back
to "Beyond Belief."
>>HANSON: Good to be back.
>>NOORY: How have you been?
>>HANSON: I have been very
well, and very excited,
because there's
always something new
to talk about when
it comes to the world
of biblical scholarship.
>>NOORY: These
constant discoveries
are amazing, aren't they?
>>HANSON: Absolutely.
Just when we think that
everything that could possibly
be found has already been found,
then voila, something else
comes up.
>>NOORY: How do they
find these artifacts?
>>HANSON: Well,
we've been undergoing
for the last several
years now, over in Israel,
an entire excavation
known as Operation Scroll.
The government of Israel
launched Operation Scroll--
>>NOORY: They're
combing the country.
>>HANSON: --in 2017 combing the
Western shore of the Dead Sea,
because 75 years ago, the first
of the famous Dead Sea Scrolls
were discovered.
In fact, they're
being now commemorated
in the current issue
of "Life" magazine.
75th anniversary of the
discovery of the Dead Sea
Scrolls back in--
>>NOORY: 1947.
>>HANSON: 1947.
>>NOORY: Same year as the
Roswell crash, by the way.
>>HANSON: What do
you know, same year.
Isn't that interesting?
Discovered, to begin with,
by a Bedouin shepherd lad--
the name was Muhammed
edh-Dhib, who was tending--
>>NOORY: In a cave.
>>HANSON: --his flock
of goats-- right--
and stumbled in a cave upon a
whole row of earthenware jars.
Found a bundle of oddly
wrapped parchments inside.
Didn't know what they were.
Took them off and
ended up selling them
to a shopkeeper in Bethlehem.
He didn't know what
they were either.
They turned out to be the
most important biblical find,
at that time--
>>NOORY: Ever.
>>HANSON: --ever.
Ever.
The Dead Sea Scrolls containing
copies, at least fragments,
of each and every book
of the Hebrew scriptures,
as well as scores and
scores of additional books--
at least fragments of scores
and scores, perhaps even
hundreds, of books, texts,
that were unknown to the world
until 1947.
Nobody even knew these existed.
For example, we
have a whole book
of Psalms, a scroll of Psalms.
People think of the
biblical book of Psalms.
This is an entire book of Psalms
that nobody ever heard of.
They look like biblical Psalms.
They're in Hebrew.
But none of them was known until
1947, when quite by accident,
a Bedouin shepherd lad
stumbled upon them in a cave.
My favorite saying
about all of this
is, you couldn't make it up.
>>NOORY: You can't make that up.
>>HANSON: You could
not make this up.
>>NOORY: And what
did the scrolls say?
Did they echo the Bible, or
was the Bible the scrolls?
>>HANSON: Well, the scrolls
were copies of the Bible.
The Bible has a very
long chain of custody,
as it were-- copies of
copies of copies of copies.
And we don't know exactly
how old the earliest
copies of the Bible were.
>>NOORY: Do we
know who wrote it?
>>HANSON: Well, tradition
says that the books
of the Pentateuch, the Torah,
as we call them in Hebrew,
were written down by Moses--
Moses--
>>NOORY: From the word of God.
>>HANSON: But we
can't prove that.
And I can tell you that
the majority of scholars
today don't buy it.
>>NOORY: No, they do not.
>>HANSON: As a scholar--
and I can talk about this.
My own colleagues do not
believe, the majority of them,
that Moses wrote much of
anything that is in the Bible.
And many doubt that
Moses even existed,
which gets into
another discovery
that we definitely
want to talk about,
because we have some
contravening evidence that
might just indicate that
there was, in fact, a Moses.
And we may in fact have a
text that he really wrote.
>>NOORY: I thought Moses came
down with the Ten Commandments,
for crying out loud.
>>HANSON: And that's
the tradition.
But how far back can
you trace this stuff?
Now, the Dead Sea Scrolls date
back to the first two centuries
before the Common Era, the 100s
BCE, before the Common Era,
and into the very beginning
of the Common Era.
And they all date
to this period.
By carbon-14, we are sure
they are exactly that old.
And it's remarkable, because
up until the discovery
of the scrolls,
the oldest copies
of the biblical text known
to exist in the world
were medieval.
>>NOORY: Aha.
>>HANSON: The famed Aleppo
Codex dates to around 980
of the Common Era.
>>NOORY: Aleppo, Syria.
>>HANSON: That's as far back
as we could trace our Bibles.
And now, we've got texts of
the Bible that are almost,
word for word, identical
to bibles we read today--
in Hebrew--
that date back about
1,000 years older
than the previous oldest texts.
>>NOORY: Kenny, do
the Dead Sea Scrolls
discuss the birth of Jesus
before he was even born?
>>HANSON: Not
directly, but they do
indicate that there
was a great expectation
for the coming of the
Messiah, the anointed one.
They had an apocalyptic
sense that they
were living in the end of days.
And that is brought
all the more into focus
by the recent finds
just announced
by the Israel Antiquities
Authority within the last year,
because as I mentioned,
there's this Operation Scroll
ongoing for the
past several years
where they're trying to find
any additional fragments
that the Bedouin might
have missed back in 1940.
>>NOORY: Which is
possible, right?
>>HANSON: And, in
fact, happened.
So the Israel
government said, look,
we need to do this in a
scientific, systematic way.
We're going to cove
every nook and cranny
up and down the western shore
of the Dead Sea, every cave.
There are thousands
of caves out there.
>>NOORY: By god.
>>HANSON: And they
use drone technology
to fly overhead and
try to inspect which
areas, which nooks,
which crannies
might actually house
explorable caves.
Then they managed to attract a
group of volunteers-- hundreds
of volunteers-- to actually
go in and explore a good 500
caves that possibly may
hold additional fragments.
So you've got these
young Israeli volunteers,
right before they
go into the army--
this is a good way to get
them used to the rigor--
>>NOORY: Combing
the countryside.
>>HANSON: --of the military.
And in this case, they're
literally rappelling down
the side of cliffs with
ropes, 250 feet down the side
of a cliff-- this
is dangerous work--
in order to get into some
of these ancient caves.
And when they enter, they're
crawling on all fours.
It's sweltering.
They have to wear
masks, of course.
You can barely breathe.
There's dust everywhere,
bat dung, bird dung.
This is difficult work.
In fact, it's not been unknown
for injuries to take place.
One major Israeli
archeologist actually
fell and died at another
archeological site
a few years ago.
So imagine the exploration
to get in there.
And they found, in the end,
over these past several years,
a whole number of ancient coins,
as well as Roman arrowheads--
because there was warfare
going on in those days
with the legions of Rome.
And most intriguingly, just
announced within the last year,
a series of about 20
parchment fragments
discovered in the distant
recesses of one cave
in particular.
It's called the Cave of Horror.
As I say, you could
not make this up.
>>NOORY: You can't make this up.
>>HANSON: Why the
Cave of Horror?
Because they also found
remnants of 40 human skeletons,
as well as a basket of skulls--
>>NOORY: 40 skeletons?
>>HANSON: 40 skeletons
and a basket of skulls.
All you need are
Nazis shooting at you,
and you've got the next
Indiana Jones film, honestly.
It's beyond belief,
as our show declares--
is "Beyond Belief."
>>NOORY: We have a show on
Gaia called "Ascension Keepers"
with William Henry.
And he talks about
the Dead Sea Scrolls
from that 1947 discovery.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- In my opinion, the accounts
of the Essenes' interactions
with the celestials
are contained
in the Dead Sea Scrolls,
the texts they left behind.
These extraordinary
texts affirm there
was something truly unusual
and mystically special
about the Essenes.
They are quintessentially
spiritual,
oriented towards
the celestial realm
and its otherworldly
inhabitants.
Their goal was an alliance
with the upper world.
The scrolls describe cosmic
battles, beings, portals,
hidden agendas, and
new superhumans.
And cloaked behind it all is
the celestial city, the home
and mother church of
their angelic teachers
and the target of
their ascension,
and how humans can ascend there.
The dark side won a
major victory in AD 68
when the Romans
decimated the Essenes
in an early example
of ethnic cleansing
or spiritual genocide.
With the destruction
of the Essenes
and the murder of almost
a million of these souls,
their ascension
teachings were lost,
stashed in caves near Qumran.
But they were not forgotten.
Mystical luminaries sought
their teachings for ages.
Believing in reincarnation,
it's possible the Essenes knew
that their disappearance
at the hands of the Romans
was a temporary
state of affairs.
They would return.
The Essenes' cache
of scrolls, in fact,
was rediscovered
by chance in 1947.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>NOORY: What was that--
the inscription was
what language, Ken?
>>HANSON: This is Hebrew.
And it's the same Hebrew
that we speak today.
I lived in Israel,
studied there.
I speak modern Hebrew.
And yet the fact that I know
Hebrew-- today's Hebrew--
made it possible for me to
go back, pick up the Dead Sea
Scrolls, and read them like
you'd read a newspaper.
And that really
stuck in my mind,
and actually propelled me to
do all of my doctoral work
and to become a
professor in this.
But now, the video mentioned
this revolt against Rome
that the Romans put
down ferociously
in 68 of the Common
Era, at which point,
the sect was wiped out.
What people don't
realize is that there
was a second great
revolt. That first revolt
didn't end the desire of
the Israelites to be free.
There were no more Essenes.
The sect was wiped out.
But other Israelites rose
up under a messianic leader.
You talked about the Messiah.
There was almost a messianic
mania in those days.
There was a messianic leader
named Simon bar Kokhba.
>>NOORY: What period are
we talking about here?
>>HANSON: We're talking about
132 to 135 of the Common Era.
That's when the
Second Great revolt--
>>NOORY: AD.
AD.
>>HANSON: Yes-- called the
Bar Kokhba revolt broke out.
A great rabbi named
Akiva, one of the greatest
rabbis of all Jewish
history, proclaimed
him to be the Messiah.
And they believed it.
Well, the Romans, under
the emperor Hadrian,
put it down even
more ferociously
than they put down
the first revolt.
And the very remnants of
that revolt hid in caves--
the same caves on the western
shore of the Dead Sea,
including the Cave of Horror.
And that's why those skeletal
remains are in there, remnants
of that second horrific
revolt. But they
believe that this was
the very end of days.
So when Operation Scroll
found these new fragments
and just unveiled them
within the last year--
>>NOORY: That's dramatic.
>>HANSON: Very dramatic.
But what did the fragments read?
Of all of the texts
they might have found,
the fragments that were
now released read this--
the mountains quake before him,
the hills melt, and the earth
heaves at his presence.
Yes, the world and
all who dwell in it.
Who can stand before
his indignation?
Who can endure the
fury of his wrath?
His fury has poured
out like fire
and the rocks are
thrown down by him.
Imagine finding that fragment--
>>NOORY: Are they talking
about God or Jesus?
>>HANSON: They're talking
about God, the god of Israel.
And they're believing-- or the
Messiah, whoever that would be.
Of course, this is
after Jesus now.
But in their case, Bar Kokhba
was their messianic leader.
And they had a sense that
this was the end of days.
>>NOORY: That's amazing.
Truly remarkable.
Now, you say they are finding
more and more scrolls.
First of all, Ken, why do you
believe they were put in caves
and hidden?
To preserve, so nobody
would destroy them?
>>HANSON: It depends, because--
>>NOORY: Is that
why they hid them?
>>HANSON: --they were
put in these caves
at different periods of
time, over centuries.
>>NOORY: Different caves?
>>HANSON: Yes.
In the case of the
Essenes, I am convinced
that this was their actual
library, that they put them
in these caves for safekeeping.
But in the case of these new
fragments from the Bar Kokhba
revolt, this was
later in history--
a good century or more later.
And these were people
hiding from the Romans.
And they took their
favorite passages
with them, their favorite
scrolls with them,
for safekeeping, of course.
And interestingly enough,
in that same cave,
the Cave of Horror, in
the distant recesses,
they found the remains of a
little girl, 6,000 years old,
that no one had discovered
before, in a flat burial
place under two flat
stones, wrapped carefully
in a blanket tucked under
her, with care and love.
A little girl.
>>NOORY: What do you think
the significance of that was?
>>HANSON: It shows us that
people had been inhabiting
these caves for thousands--
>>NOORY: Living in them.
>>HANSON: Yes.
Thousands and
thousands of years.
The oldest city on the
face of the Earth, Jericho,
goes back 10,000, 11,000 years.
>>NOORY: The walls
came tumbling down.
>>HANSON: Exactly.
Exactly.
And here, we have,
not far from there,
in a cave, the remains
of a little girl.
And in the same cave,
even further back,
we have the remains of
the world's oldest basket.
>>NOORY: You do your
own videos, don't you?
>>HANSON: I do.
>>NOORY: And let's take
a look at one of them
regarding the Dead Sea Scrolls
and the Book of Habakkuk?
>>HANSON: Exactly.
>>NOORY: All right.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- Habakkuk is a thin book
in the Hebrew Bible, which
speaks of the impending doom of
the ancient Israelite kingdom
as it was about to be gobbled
up by the powerful Babylonian
Empire.
The prophet bemoans the
sins of the people which
have brought about
this catastrophe,
but he concludes
that whatever is
to be the national fate
of Israel, the thing to do
is to be faithful
on a personal level.
He makes the classic statement--
[SPEAKING HEBREW]
The doom that the prophet
sees is imminent and involves
actual historical events--
the impending destruction of
the nation by a foreign power.
This is where good
detective work
is required, because
the Dead Sea Habakkuk
commentary, by contrast, is more
an apocalyptic work regarding
the end of days than
a straightforward
explanation of what the
biblical book is all about.
In fact, the word "apocalypse,"
a term akin to eschatology,
comes from a Greek
root meaning that
which is revealed, and well
describes what the Dead Sea
Scrolls are all about.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>NOORY: If I didn't
know better, Ken,
I'd say those were
your costumes.
>>HANSON: As a matter
of fact, I like
to do character impersonations
for my students.
I created entire series of--
>>NOORY: Well, I
think that's great.
>>HANSON: --courses, classes,
for the University of Central
Florida, where I'm professor.
So there, you saw
my impersonation
of the detective Hercule Poirot,
as well as the ancient prophet.
But this is like detective work.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
>>HANSON: And we have the
most incredible detective saga
now revolving around
yet another find
that has been re-evaluated,
also, within the last year.
And we may call it
the Moses scroll.
>>NOORY: Let's take
a look at this.
I want you to tell
us what this is.
>>HANSON: We're
looking at a facsimile
that I have created of an
artifact discovered, again,
by the Bedouin in a cave
east of the Dead Sea.
Now, this is trans-Jordan--
>>NOORY: When was
that discovered?
>>HANSON: It was discovered
in the late 1860s
by the Bedouin wrapped in linen.
This is long before the Dead
Sea Scrolls were ever found,
but wrapped in the same
kind of linen cloth.
And within, we have a series
of parchment fragments.
There were 16 altogether.
And--
>>NOORY: Let me hold this for
you while you show us this.
>>HANSON: And I've made a
facsimile here of one of them.
This is a text in paleo-Hebrew.
This is not the
Hebrew we read today.
>>NOORY: Now, the original
one would be how old?
>>HANSON: The original
one, we don't know.
But based on the
language itself--
>>NOORY: Almost a
thousand years old?
>>HANSON: --we're thinking
about 800 to 900 BCE,
before the Common Era.
>>NOORY: Wow.
>>HANSON: And the Bedouin didn't
know what they had discovered.
They sold it for a pittance
to a shopkeeper in Jerusalem
named Moses Shapira.
>>NOORY: And the
writing is Hebrew?
>>HANSON: The writing is
paleo-Hebrew, exactly.
>>NOORY: You can read that?
>>HANSON: Yes.
And we're looking, over
here in this column,
at the most important passage
in all of the Hebrew scriptures,
from the sixth chapter of
the Book of Deuteronomy.
It says, in Hebrew,
[SPEAKING HEBREW] here,
oh, Israel, God,
our God, God is one.
That's what this text says.
Now, Moses Shapira, who
bought this from the Bedouin,
he looked at this
and he said, this
is an abbreviated version
of the Book of Deuteronomy--
and a shortened version.
And he became
convinced that this
may have been Moses' own copy.
>>NOORY: Wow.
>>HANSON: Now, as I mentioned,
most scholars today,
including my colleagues, doubt
that Moses ever wrote anything.
Most doubt that
Moses even existed.
>>NOORY: Why are they doubting
all of this all of a sudden?
>>HANSON: Because when we
look at the traditional book
of Deuteronomy--
I have a copy of one
fragment of it here.
This is only about
300 years old.
This is a relatively
recent copy of Deuteronomy,
just three centuries old.
Contains the first of
the Ten Commandments--
>>NOORY: The Bible has
the book of Deuteronomy.
It's this, right?
>>HANSON: Yes.
This is the traditional
book of Deuteronomy.
It's much longer
than the fragments
that were shown to Shapira.
>>NOORY: Who was Deuteronomy?
>>HANSON: Deuteronomy is
ascribed to Moses himself.
But it has all
manner of laws in it
that discuss what you
will do, you Israelites,
when you settle in
the land of Canaan.
For example, it
has the famous law,
don't muzzle an ox as
it treads out the grain.
And wait a second, where were
the Israelites, wandering
in the desert for 40 years?
What ox?
What grain?
Moses couldn't have
written anything like that.
And chapters and chapters of
laws for a settled agrarian
society that made no sense for
people wandering in the desert.
So my colleague friends,
my scholarly friends,
say, oh, this could not
have been written by Moses.
This was all just made
up centuries later
and ascribed to Moses.
Well, guess what?
None of those
problematical passages
are in the Moses scroll.
If you could
fabricate or imagine
a document that the real
Moses actually wrote,
this would be it.
In fact, the very
divine name YHWH--
a lot of people are
familiar with YHWH.
It's pronounced yah-- and we
don't even say the rest of it
in Judaism.
It's too holy.
That name doesn't appear
in the Moses scroll.
Because the idea is
that the term Elohim
was used at that
very early date,
and the YHWH not
introduced till later.
Well, the story gets
more fascinating,
because Shapira was
blown away by this.
He showed it to some
scholarly friends.
He went to Europe.
He went to Leipzig.
He went to Berlin.
One scholar in Berlin said,
if this is not authentic,
I will eat it.
He was that convinced.
Then Shapira took these
16 fragments to London,
to the British Museum, where
they were put on display,
amidst great fanfare--
huge throngs, crowds,
the newspapers.
The prime minister of Britain in
those days, William Gladstone,
came and inspected them himself.
And the museum was prepared
to offer Moses Shapira
a sum of one million
pounds sterling for what
would be the most important
biblical document ever
discovered.
>>NOORY: See, I'm
convinced, Ken,
that some billionaires
have documents hidden
away somewhere in their house.
>>HANSON: Well, I
wouldn't be surprised.
And it actually relates to this.
Because what happened
almost immediately
is that the scholarly
community started doubting it,
because they hadn't yet
discovered the Dead Sea
Scrolls.
In fact, when the Dead Sea
Scrolls were first discovered,
the great scholar Solomon
Zeitlin said, forgery.
Fraud.
Dead Sea Scrolls?
>>NOORY: Don't exist, right?
>>HANSON: Well, these
were just forgeries
that you're showing to us.
These are not ancient.
It took carbon-14 to
prove that they're,
in fact, 2,000 years
old, because nothing
that old could survive.
>>NOORY: And the jars they
put them in were clay.
>>HANSON: Clay jars
that preserved them.
Now, in this case,
we didn't have
carbon-14 in the 19th century.
>>NOORY: No, of course not.
>>HANSON: This was 1883 already
by the time they ended up
in Britain.
And the--
>>NOORY: What was the material
they wrote this on, parchment?
>>HANSON: This is leather,
a leathery type of material
covered with--
>>NOORY: From an animal.
>>HANSON: --an asphalt-- yes,
with an asphalt type of resin,
folded like this so that
only text touched text.
>>NOORY: What did
they use for the ink?
>>HANSON:
Traditionally, they used
gall nut, which is where
a wasp stings a tree
and it produces a
little bump in the tree,
and that's ground up and
combined with carbon powder.
That's how traditional Torahs
are inscribed even today.
But we don't have the
scrolls to examine anymore.
Why?
Because the scholars
began to denounce these.
They said, this
has to be a fake.
It has to be a forgery, a fraud.
Nothing that old could survive.
We didn't have carbon-14.
>>NOORY: And you, of course,
think that's ridiculous, right?
It did survive.
>>HANSON: Well, what happened
was, poor Moses Shapira was
disgraced.
The British Museum took
them down from display.
Shapira was ruined.
His reputation was destroyed.
His family.
>>NOORY: And they thought
he concocted this?
>>HANSON: Yes, he was accused
of forging them himself.
He ended up fleeing
to Holland, where
he tried to find some
other scholars on his side.
He couldn't.
And in the end, the
poor man shot himself.
>>NOORY: Oh, my god.
>>HANSON: He committed suicide.
>>NOORY: The pressure
was that bad.
>>HANSON: It was that bad.
His family was
ruined in bankruptcy.
His shop in Jerusalem, they
had to sell everything.
And what about these
16 parchment fragments?
Well--
>>NOORY: And where are they?
>>HANSON: The British Museum put
them up for auction in London,
and they were sold for a
sum of 10 pounds sterling.
Can you imagine that?
>>NOORY: Who bought them?
>>HANSON: A bookseller.
Just a bookseller bought them.
His name was Karadzic.
And he sold them to another
gentleman, who basically
wrote an article about them.
Also believed they were frauds.
And subsequently, they vanished.
>>NOORY: Like I
just said, somebody
has them in their house.
>>HANSON: They've vanished.
>>NOORY: Taken away.
>>HANSON: And no one has
seen a trace of them since.
Talk about a detective story.
Now, what we have
that has survived
are some old photos that are
illegible, back in the 1800s.
We also have detailed
transcriptions
where, back then, they
came along and made
a transcription, in
ink, of every letter
on all of these scrolls.
>>NOORY: Ken, let's take a look
at biblical scholar Michael
Heiser, whom I interviewed,
talking about similar things
that you've just brought up.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- Adam, Noah, Moses, Joshua.
Not all of those figures
are called prophets,
but they all have
one thing in common,
and that is a divine encounter.
- A connection.
So God comes to them in
some sort of memorable--
and I think if
God came to me, it
would be easy to remember
that day in my life.
But it's a memorable event.
And they get commissioned.
God comes to them and says,
I've picked you for this task.
Yeah.
So that's why they do it,
because again, they're--
hey, I don't want to disobey
this encounter message.
You even get arguments, though.
Moses actually argues
with God about why
he shouldn't pick him.
Well, I can't speak well.
I can't do this.
I can't do that.
- He didn't want to be picked.
- He didn't-- right.
He didn't want to
go back to Egypt.
But God more or less assures
him that at the end of the day,
you're going to be OK.
I'm going to be with you.
And he gives them,
again, signs to show
Pharaoh that are miraculous.
And so Moses quits
fighting and goes back.
But it's really about
the divine encounter.
[END PLAYBACK]
There are two parts of the
Bible that fascinate me, Ken--
Genesis and the
Book of Revelation.
Who wrote the Book
of Revelation?
Was that written by John?
>>HANSON: Traditionally, it was
written by the apostle John,
although I have my
own ideas about that.
I think it was a John,
but personally, I
think we may be
talking about a rather
mysterious 13th disciple--
>>NOORY: Oh, really?
>>HANSON: --in the shadows, the
so-called "beloved disciple,"
who also happens to have
been an Israelite priest.
>>NOORY: Now, was the
Book of Revelation
discovered in the Dead
Sea Scrolls as well?
>>HANSON: No, but we do have
a very apocalyptic document
referenced in our earlier
video that talks about war
at the end of the age.
It's called the
war scroll, and it
describes a series of seven
end-time apocalyptic battles
between the sons of
light, so-called,
and the sons of darkness.
>>NOORY: How many of those seven
battles have we had to date?
>>HANSON: Well, they
felt, back in those days,
that they were going
through them at the time.
>>NOORY: Every society thought
they were in the end times.
>>HANSON: Yeah.
And so what I like to
look at are cycles--
apocalyptic, as it were, cycles.
And sure enough, as you
look down through history,
there are apocalypses that
occur from time to time.
>>NOORY: Of course.
>>HANSON: I teach the
history of the Holocaust.
>>NOORY: We may be in one now.
>>HANSON: And we
may be in one now.
And as we mentioned earlier,
those people in the Bar Kokhba
revolt, hiding in
that Cave of Horror,
felt that, certainly,
that they were in one.
And in the days of
Jeremiah the prophet,
the Babylonians came
in and destroyed
the great temple of Jerusalem--
>>NOORY: It's beautiful.
>>HANSON: --in those days.
And--
>>NOORY: That's a replica
of what it would look like.
>>HANSON: Of course.
A replica of the
temple of Jerusalem.
>>NOORY: How big would that have
been, in terms of our scale?
>>HANSON: It was at least
90 feet high, covered--
>>NOORY: It's huge.
>>HANSON: --covered
over in gold.
And inside, it was
all cedar wood.
But it was completely
destroyed, burned to the ground
by the Babylonians.
Now, we have a
non-biblical text,
did not make it into
our Bibles, called
the Book of Second Maccabees.
And in that book, we're told
that the prophet Jeremiah
brought the Ark
of the Covenant--
he took the Ark of the
Covenant out of that temple,
along with the altar of
incense and the so-called tent.
We're not told what
the tent is, but I'm
convinced it was the contents
of the Holy of Holies.
Now, we're also told in
the book of Deuteronomy
that Moses commanded
that a copy of his book
be placed in the
Holy of Holies next
to the Ark of the
Covenant for all time.
>>NOORY: When did
Moses apparently live?
>>HANSON: That's
also in dispute.
If he lived, most scholars
think in the 1200s.
I put him in the 1400s BC.
That's another
story, because I'm
a little bit more conservative.
I actually follow the
biblical timeline on it,
two centuries earlier.
>>NOORY: Why is there some
doubt now of his existence?
>>HANSON: It's believed
that Moses could not
have written all of
the details in Genesis
through Deuteronomy
traditionally ascribed to him.
There was just too
much that referred
to even the city of Jerusalem.
There are references
to Jerusalem
that Moses wouldn't
have written.
But he would have written
this Moses scroll.
None of that problematical
stuff is there.
And we're told, in
Second Maccabees,
that Jeremiah brought
all this stuff, including
the Ark of the Covenant,
out into the desert
and hid it away in a cave.
And where was the Moses scroll
discovered in the 1860s?
By a Bedouin in a cave.
Voila.
Touch.
You could not make this up.
It's beyond belief.
>>NOORY: It is beyond belief.
It's truly remarkable.
Who was Moses, in your opinion?
>>HANSON: I love Moses.
I think that there--
>>NOORY: Charlton
Heston played him well.
>>HANSON: He played him well.
But even though scholars
doubt his existence,
I say that if there
were no Moses,
we would have to invent one,
because great movements,
great peoples, don't come
about with no leader.
Even the United
States, of course,
had it not been for
George Washington,
there would be no
United States, for sure.
As a historian, we
wouldn't have made it.
It takes strong leaders
to build a movement that
turns into a people.
Moses had to have been,
had to have existed.
And by the way, I
think he was probably
one of the greatest military
commanders of all time.
>>NOORY: Is that what
he was originally?
>>HANSON: You can
look at him that way.
You certainly can.
This escape out of
Egypt was remarkable.
>>NOORY: Did he have
scribes working for him?
>>HANSON: Doesn't say so.
And some scholars have
doubted that writing even
existed in those days.
But more recently,
we now have examples
of proto-Semitic
writing on stone
that have been unearthed
that do date to be that old.
So I don't discount
at all the possibility
that Moses not only
lived, but that he wrote,
and that his writings,
according to the Bible,
were written down,
were communicated.
We're told that his
successor, Joshua, came out
to the great Mount Ebal
in the land of Canaan,
where the curses of
the law had been read,
and he subsequently
built an altar there,
and he wrote upon them
the law of Moses--
the law of Moses.
I think we're, again,
looking at the Moses scroll.
>>NOORY: Why is there
so much controversy
surrounding this account?
>>HANSON: Well, we have a
lot of minimalist scholars
who basically believe if it's in
the Bible, it must not be true.
And that's very popular--
>>NOORY: Really?
>>HANSON: --in the
halls of scholarship.
Absolutely.
>>NOORY: Are these
religious people?
>>HANSON: Many of
them, of course, are.
But they tend to view biblical
texts in a very loose manner.
And I wouldn't take
them exactly word
for word, because
I think that there
is an evolution in
these biblical texts.
This Moses scroll is,
I, think predating
our traditional
scroll of Deuteronomy.
>>NOORY: Assuming everything
you've said today is real--
and I have no doubts about you--
but let's assume
they are all real.
What does that tell us about
these ancient artifacts?
What does that tell us
about Jesus, about God?
What does that all mean to us?
>>HANSON: Well, we have
an era of discovery
going on-- and still going on--
such as we've never had before.
We have tools at our disposal
that really can help to verify
ancient accounts, to indicate
what we can rely on, what we
can't.
There were a whole
group of, quote,
unquote, "Dead Sea Scrolls"
that were passed off
to the Museum of the Bible
just a year or so ago,
and they turned out
to be forgeries.
But we have the
tools now to examine
what's real, what
isn't, and we can use
the best tools of scholarship.
And oftentimes, what we
find is that while it's
fashionable to doubt
everything, hey,
we often find that the
more of these tools we use,
the more we, in fact, verify
exactly the traditions
that were handed down.
>>NOORY: Why the forgeries?
For money, profit?
>>HANSON: Absolutely.
And the Moses scroll,
claimed to be a forgery.
Even today, my
scholarly colleagues
are calling this a forgery.
>>NOORY: How do you
authenticate it?
>>HANSON: I ask, if
this is not authentic,
who on Earth would
have forged it?
The Bedouin?
>>NOORY: And what's--
>>HANSON: Did they know enough
to forge a text like this?
>>NOORY: --the motive?
>>HANSON: And what's the motive?
They sold it for a pittance to
Moses Shapira, the shopkeeper.
Now, it's claimed that Moses
Shapira would have forged this.
But wait a second, we
have another fine scholar,
an American Jewish
Israeli, who has recently,
within in the last
year, published
a major scholarly work
on the Moses scroll.
He has actually
gone back to Berlin
and found, in the
Berlin archives,
Moses Shapira's own papers,
where he is staring at--
>>NOORY: In Berlin.
>>HANSON: In Berlin.
Because after he bought them
from the Bedouin, he said,
this is incredible.
I've got to show them
to other scholars.
He went to Leipzig,
Berlin, and on to London.
But while he was in
Berlin, he showed them
to the scholar who said, if
this isn't real, I'll eat it.
So he has his papers.
His papers were
lodged in Berlin.
And in those papers--
>>NOORY: That's ironic.
>>HANSON: --Moses Shapira
is straining over this text
trying to figure out what it
means, deciphering the letters,
and making mistakes
as he goes along.
Now, would someone who
had forged this document
be trying to figure
out what they mean
and making mistakes
on a document
that he had forged himself?
It's impossible.
>>NOORY: Probably not.
>>HANSON: If this
is not authentic,
then who on Earth
might have forged
that that's the question.
And there's no answer to that.
My scholarly colleagues
have no answer.
It's a little bit like
those scholars who
examine the plays
of Shakespeare,
and with all of
the minutia, start
counting the number of times
"to be" appears in Shakespeare,
and then try to use that
to prove that Shakespeare
didn't write his own plays.
That's exactly what goes on
in the halls of scholarship.
I call it straining at
gnats without getting
the big picture.
And the big picture
is this, if it's real,
it's the most astounding, most
important biblical discovery
in history.
>>NOORY: Are you
concerned about things
in the Book of Revelation?
Do they scare you, Ken?
>>HANSON: When I look at the
world today, a lot of things
scare me, because as I say,
I can see apocalyptic cycles.
Imagine living during the
period of the Holocaust.
These things happen
over and over again.
I don't know when the
end of days will be,
but I can tell you that
in the Jewish world, which
I'm a part of, there is also
discussion of what's called
the pangs of the Messiah,
[SPEAKING HEBREW] in Hebrew.
That before the messianic
age and the world
of peace will dawn,
before the Messiah comes--
and of course, Jews are waiting
for the first appearance
of the Messiah,
Christians the second.
But before the end comes, there
will be a time of trouble,
of pangs--
birth pangs, as it were--
a time of war, famine.
Even inflation is mentioned
among the ancient rabbis.
So we look out today
at the various threats.
I look at the nuclear threats
around the world today,
especially in the Middle East.
This is terrifying stuff.
>>NOORY: And it's
terrifying and real.
>>HANSON: And we need we
need strong leadership.
Because I don't want
to see the world go up
in flames, as that ancient
scroll had declared
the rocks are thrown down
by him, the hills melt.
It sounds almost like a
nuclear conflagration.
>>NOORY: In your opinion,
what was the Garden of Eden?
>>HANSON: An idyllic
state that existed,
of course, at the
very beginning.
We don't know
exactly where it was.
And of course, scholars dismiss
all this as mythological.
But there are actual locations
in the Middle East where,
in fact--
>>NOORY: Some say it
was in Iraq, right?
>>HANSON: That is one
possibility, absolutely,
where you can look at where
the rivers came together.
And there is a theory--
a good scholarly theory-- that
at the very beginning of human
consciousness, there was
a belief in a single god,
which contradicts
a lot of thinking--
>>NOORY: Monotheism.
>>HANSON: Monotheism
actually may
have been the very
first concept, which
is very interesting.
>>NOORY: Well, let's see
if you agree with this,
from Gaia's "Ancient
Civilizations,"
about the Garden of Eden.
Let's see if that echoes
what you're telling us.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- The search for
something more powerful
than our own current reality
isn't a modern concept,
but rather an ongoing
search for the location
of the Garden of Eden,
the proverbial beginning.
- There's been a fixation
amongst biblical scholars,
early archaeologists, that
everything in the Middle East
began on the Euphrates and the
Tigris, down in what is today
lower Iraq, and that this
is where the Garden of Eden
was, this was where
everything emerged,
good and bad, in the sort
of Genesis tradition.
- In 1922, English
archaeologist C. Leonard Woolley
went to southern Iraq
to hopefully find
the Garden of Eden based
on early discoveries
of Sumerian cuneiforms.
However, what he
actually uncovered,
instead, was the exact location
of the ancient Sumerian
city of Ur.
Was he getting close?
- The early archaeologists
were trying to prove the Bible.
And they were funded
by biblical societies.
And that's-- in other words,
they had to come up with
the proof.
And it ignored a lot of
legends and traditions
which suggested that these
cities were elsewhere.
- Could Woolley have ignored
some important information
that was revealed
several years before?
In 1849, almost
75 years earlier,
thousands of Sumerian cuneiforms
were found northwest of Ur
at the ancient cities
of Sippar and Nippur.
- [SPEAKING FRENCH]
- In 1849, Henry Layard
performed many excavations
on the Sippar site
and discovered
about 20,000 tablets,
Sumerian and Akkadian.
And amongst all of the tablets
discovered, about a dozen
of them are about
the Garden of Eden.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>NOORY: Fascinating, Ken.
>>HANSON: Fascinating.
And Sir Leonard Woolley
was a real pioneer
in all of this
archaeological work.
He really believed that he
had found Abraham's hometown
and people would come
and visit him and say,
this is a house Abraham
might have lived in.
Well, we're not so sure,
as scientific methodology
has progressed.
But nonetheless, these people
blazed a trail in archaeology.
They took the Bible seriously.
They took it literally.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
>>HANSON: And these
ancient traditions,
even oral traditions, are not
to be dismissed so lightly.
It came to be all the
rage in the 19th century,
with the German school
of biblical scholarship,
to dismiss as much of
the Bible as possible.
But I'm in that small cadre,
admittedly, of scholars
who think that we need to
re-examine these biblical texts
and take them as
seriously as we can,
because these traditions
are well founded,
and they are very
ancient indeed.
>>NOORY: Will they ever find
the tomb where Jesus was laid?
>>HANSON: I think I know.
I think I know where it is.
>>NOORY: Really?
Where?
>>HANSON: That's one
instance where I believe
it's the traditional site.
In the Church of
the Holy Sepulcher,
you go into that church
today, and this entire--
>>NOORY: It's on that ground?
>>HANSON: Exactly.
This entire area
that used to be part
of a limestone quarry for
the ancient city of Jerusalem
was leveled, and a
church built there
by the emperor Constantine's
mother, Helena.
And so consequently--
>>NOORY: Sacred ground.
>>HANSON: --the topography
has all been destroyed,
yet there is a site of
the traditional tomb
inside the church itself.
You have to literally
crouch-crawl to get into it.
But that tomb itself
was recently repaired,
shall we say.
There was restoration work
done on the inner chamber.
And everything seems to match
what the record tells us
about the cave where Jesus
would actually have been laid.
It was a first-century
burial area.
There are other first-century
tombs and fresh tombs
in the basement of that church.
I've been there.
So it's an archaeological
paradise to dive
into all of this.
>>NOORY: Ken, thanks for
being on "Beyond Belief."
Fascinating.
>>HANSON: It's a pleasure.
Folks can go to my
website, drkenhanson.com.
And my new book, don't
forget, "Whose Holy Land?
Archaeology Meets Geopolitics
in Today's Middle East."
>>NOORY: Sounds exciting.
It is amazing.
They continue to find
discoveries in caves
throughout the Middle East.
I wonder what the next
discovery will show.
I'm George Noory.
Thanks for watching
"Beyond Belief."